Introduce remove ambiguous grammar RFC (#1)
surrealdb/rfcs: text/0001-remove_ambiguous_grammar.md

# SurrealQL: Remove ambiguity in grammar

Status: Open for suggestion
Creator: Mees Delzenne
Owner: Mees Delzenne
Last edited time: October 11, 2023 3:56 PM
tag: SurrealQL

# 1. Summary

> The current version of SurrealQL grammar, as defined by what the parser currently accepts, contains several ambiguous productions. These productions are parsed differently depending on the context or can seem very similar to each other, but subtle differences can result in completely different semantics.

Reviewer: question: what is a "production".

Reviewer: Never mind, I see the glossary.  Maybe bring Glossary to top as a level 1 header, or have a table of contents?

Author: Alright! will do!

These ambiguities in the grammar complicate parser design, limit possible future extensions to SurrealQL that don't break, and could be confusing when using the language.

This RFC proposes several changes to the grammar to limit the present ambiguity:

- Disallow a value from starting with an identifier which could, in its current position in the grammar, start a statement as a keyword.
- Require that raw identifiers don't start with a digit.
- Introduce strand prefixes for the specific types of strands
- Introduce a syntax error for block record-id object ambiguity
- Change the KNN operator from `<3>` to `knn<3>` or similar

## Glossary

- Production: A branch or leaf of the parse tree.
- Identifier: Names used in code which don't belong to the structure of a statement.

> - Raw Identifier: A identifier without being surrounded by ` or `⟨ ⟩`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Raw Identifier: A identifier without being surrounded by \` or `⟨ ⟩`
```

Reviewer 2: Seems like I was looking at an old commit, I don't see the option to resolve however

More examples of these types of confusing grammar can probably be found.

## Hard to specify

As we are working towards a production ready database we should probably eventually create an official specification for the SurrealQL language. Most languages are either Context-Free or almost Context-Free and therefore allow specifying the grammar in Context-Free grammar. See for example the JavaScript spec: [https://tc39.es/ecma262/#prod-Statement](https://tc39.es/ecma262/#prod-Statement)

The current ambiguities in the language make it impossible to specify a grammar for SurrealQL in the same way.

## Extendibility

Because a lot of the current syntax is defined in part by the failure to parse other productions, productions which today are parsed one why could in the future silently change to have a completely different semantic meaning.

Consider the following query:

```sql
SELECT count FROM table GROUP count
```

> Currently the values from this select will be grouped by the field key. But where we to every introduce some feature which would require the `COUNT` keyword after `GROUP` then this code will quietly change meaning.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently the values from this select will be grouped by the field key. But were we to ever introduce some feature which would require the `COUNT` keyword after `GROUP` then this code will quietly change meaning.
```

# 3. Proposal

## Location specific reserved words.

> The first change proposed is to disallow raw identifiers in places where the same identifier could also be parsed as a keyword. For example, the following code would no longer be allowed:

Reviewer: Could it be more simple to just disallow certain keywords, and not allow for it to be wrapped? Would users be very upset by being unable to use a few keywords? In my case, if I saw an error message saying "can't use this keyword", I would just change it to something else. But I am only 1 person so not sure.

```

The part after `FROM` can also have statements, however the USE statement is disallowed in subqueries, therefore allowing `use` would not be a problem.

This change would completely remove existing ambiguity wherever an expression could possibly be parsed as a statement. It would simplify the parser a great deal. This changes also does not require that raw identifiers are completely distinct.

## Disallow raw identifiers to start with a digit

This is a common way to distinguish between a digit and number. By disallowing the first character from being a digit we can be sure that Identifiers aren’t numbers. This would resolve the same text from being used as an identifier or a number depending on the place in the grammar.

## Introduce strand prefixes

The only way can currently be distinguished is if one strand fails to parse as any of the other types. This can lead to problems where a use wanted a certain value to be a plain strand but it happened to match another type of strand and is thus converted into that specific type.

And example is `"5:00"` which brought up in an issue. The user wanted to store this value as a plain strand but it happened to match a thing strand.

> I propose we introduce specific strand prefixes for specific strand types:

Reviewer: :heart:

Reviewer: question: will single quotes or double quotes matter? I notice uuid uses single quotes and the other 2 examples use double. Assuming either will be acceptable?

Author: Yes either is acceptable, the only difference is the `u` or `t` in front of the string.

Reviewer 3: What about ULIDs?? Taking a glance at SurrealDB's code, it seems that they are handled quite differently than UUIDs. Are they stored differently as well?

Also, I'm apprehensive about the record strand prefix.
I get it for datetime and UUIDs, but for solving the ambiguity between record IDs and object fields, I think the object syntax should change.

I think the way to go is to make objects have fields that are string literals.
(In the future there could be format strings, which would allow for dynamically setting the field name)

So, for your example:
```sql
{ a:b.c }
```
Is taking the field `c` of a record `a:b`.
To express an object with field `a` with a value of `b.c`, you would instead write:
```sql
{ "a":b.c }
```
This also mirrors the rules in JSON.

- `t"2012-05-26T12-00-00Z"` for date-time strands
- `u'7c3f4ce8-83c4-458f-b1d7-b28352dea93c'` for UUID’s
- `r"5:00"` for record id strings

## Syntax Error for Block-RecordId Object ambiguity

The following statement is ambiguous:

```sql
{ a:b.c }
```

This can be parsed either as an object with a field `a` and value `b.c`, or as a block statement taking the field `c` of the record `a:b`. Removing this ambiguity completely would require making significant changes to how record IDs are joined (changing the `:` to something else) or requiring that either blocks or objects always be enclosed by parentheses. Both of these changes are quite drastic for a relatively minor ambiguity.

> Therefore, I propose that if the parser encounters `{` `Identifier` `:`, it raises a syntax error to notify the user of the ambiguity. The user would then need to either use a record ID strand if they intended to create a block, or make the identifier a strand if they intended to create an object.

Reviewer: To visualize, would it be like:
```sql
{ r"some_record_id":b.c  }
```
or
```sql
{ a: u"some_uuid" }
```

Author: This ambiguity is unrelated to the ambiguity of strands.

This is a ambiguity is caused by the fact that raw records are allowed. you can for example write `CREATE some_table:some_specific_id;`. The problem is the `:`. If a raw record is the first statement in an block statement it looks exactly like an object. 

In the example `{ a:b.c }`, `a:b` looks like a raw record but it could also be a field definition with a value. 

Raw records will still be allowed in these proposed changes, so we need a way to define the value of `{ a:b.c }`. Currently the parse will first try to match an object and then try to match a block statement. This results in strange behavior like `{a:b.c; true }` being parsed as an block but `{a:b.c }` is parsed as an object.

The proposed change here is to define that if the parsers sees `{` followed by and identifier followed by `:` it will always choose to parse an object and error if it encounters `{a:b.c; true }`. To make this statement work again you could use a record strand: `{ r"a:b".c; true }`.

Reviewer: Ok, I think I see now. So the last code snippet at the end of your comment was what I was trying to understand. 

So the 2 options you mentioned in the rfc would be visualized as `{ r"a:b".c; true }` or  `{ a:r"b.c"; true }`?

I propose we introduce specific strand prefixes for specific strand types:

- `t"2012-05-26T12-00-00Z"` for date-time strands
- `u'7c3f4ce8-83c4-458f-b1d7-b28352dea93c'` for UUID’s
- `r"5:00"` for record id strings

## Syntax Error for Block-RecordId Object ambiguity

The following statement is ambiguous:

```sql
{ a:b.c }
```

This can be parsed either as an object with a field `a` and value `b.c`, or as a block statement taking the field `c` of the record `a:b`. Removing this ambiguity completely would require making significant changes to how record IDs are joined (changing the `:` to something else) or requiring that either blocks or objects always be enclosed by parentheses. Both of these changes are quite drastic for a relatively minor ambiguity.

Therefore, I propose that if the parser encounters `{` `Identifier` `:`, it raises a syntax error to notify the user of the ambiguity. The user would then need to either use a record ID strand if they intended to create a block, or make the identifier a strand if they intended to create an object.

# 4. Drawbacks

- Some queries now require more type and syntax than they previously did.
- These changes break existing code.

> - These new changes could be more difficuly to learn initially as it introduces more syntax rules to remember.

Reviewer: If error messaging is concise and explicit as you proposed, I don't think this would be too bad to learn, vs. hitting what seem like common ambiguity problems.

Author: I agree! but it is still kind of a drawback.

Reviewer: Not arguing there, just commenting that in my personal opinion I think the benefit would outweigh the drawback :).

# 5. Alternatives

## Limited reserved word list

> Instead of location specific keywords we could instead specify a limited list of keywords which are disallowed. Keywords which can't start a statement like `EVENT` or `TABLE` would still be allowed, but `USE` would be disallowed everywhere.

Reviewer: :heart: - I personally prefer this to #3. I should have kept reading before leaving that comment! haha

This would probably be easier to communicate then location specific keywords

# 6. Potential Impacts

The proposed changes are breaking changes. They will probably break existing code, if a limited set. As we have guaranteed stability it introducing these changes as the default would require releasing a new major version. Therefore I propose that the new parser will implement this syntax and introduce the new parser as a new experimental feature which in the future will possibly become the default.

# 7. Unresolved Questions

## What do we change the KNN operator to?

The `knn<3>` operator seems a bit verbose and rather complex looking for an operator. 
Is this the right syntax.

> ## How do we differentiate an plain object from a geometry object?

Reviewer: I am very curious about this. I am not too sure what is currently considered a plain object and a geometry object. Are there any examples?

Reviewer: Ah, I see a Geometry example at the bottom of page. 

Is there potential that one may want to do topological analysis on plain objects like vectors or matrices, because then maybe with Geometry as a supertype one can share topology methods with plain objects?

Author: Geometry objects are objects which have a very specific layout. The following query returns one kind of geometry object.
```sql
RETURN { 
    type: 'LineString',
    coordinates: [1,2,3,4]
}
```
As you can see it looks exactly like an normal object but if you change even a small part like for example:
```sql
RETURN { 
    type: 'LinesString',
    coordinates: [1,2,3,4]
}
```
(`Lines` instead of `Line`) it is suddenly a plain object and no longer a geometry.

Author: I shall add this example to the rfc

Reviewer: I think considering making the plain object the supertype may also be an option: one may be able to draw some tangents from geometry kernels and languages like apt for example: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/APT_(programming_language). 

At the end of the day Geometry is comprised of plain objects. And this way plain objects are limited to methods that work for them, and geometry objects can be expanded.

Reviewer 3: Are there any semantic differences between geometry objects and plain objects (like operations)? 
If not, then maybe the best thing to do is to treat geometries like plain objects by default and allow for defining the field as otherwise.
This would mean that an application like Surrealist can get information about the table to know how to display those fields.
We can even copy the `record<table>` syntax as `object<schema>`. There is even the potential to allow for user-defined schemas to validate against using a URI (maybe like `object<"http://example.org/bibliography.schema.json">`).

So for a geometry object this might look like:
`DEFINE FIELD position ON TABLE location_history TYPE object<geometry>;`

Reviewer 3: Oh, guess there are operators specialized for geometry objects. Maybe it would be better to move these operators to functions.
For example:
```sql
(-0.118092, 51.509865) INSIDE {
    type: "Polygon",
    coordinates: [[
        [-0.38314819, 51.37692386], [0.1785278, 51.37692386],
        [0.1785278, 51.61460570], [-0.38314819, 51.61460570],
        [-0.38314819, 51.37692386]
    ]]
};
```
Could be:
```sql
geometry::inside((-0.118092, 51.509865), {
    type: "Polygon",
    coordinates: [[
        [-0.38314819, 51.37692386], [0.1785278, 51.37692386],
        [0.1785278, 51.61460570], [-0.38314819, 51.61460570],
        [-0.38314819, 51.37692386]
    ]]
});
```
Then the `INSIDE` operator could be generalized to plain objects. For example:
```sql
{ "foo": "bar" } INSIDE { "foo: "bar", "biz": "fiz" }
```

## Disallow raw identifiers to start with a digit

This is a common way to distinguish between a digit and number. By disallowing the first character from being a digit we can be sure that Identifiers aren’t numbers. This would resolve the same text from being used as an identifier or a number depending on the place in the grammar.

## Introduce strand prefixes

The only way can currently be distinguished is if one strand fails to parse as any of the other types. This can lead to problems where a use wanted a certain value to be a plain strand but it happened to match another type of strand and is thus converted into that specific type.

And example is `"5:00"` which brought up in an issue. The user wanted to store this value as a plain strand but it happened to match a thing strand.

I propose we introduce specific strand prefixes for specific strand types:

- `t"2012-05-26T12-00-00Z"` for date-time strands
- `u'7c3f4ce8-83c4-458f-b1d7-b28352dea93c'` for UUID’s
- `r"5:00"` for record id strings

## Syntax Error for Block-RecordId Object ambiguity

The following statement is ambiguous:

```sql
{ a:b.c }
```

> This can be parsed either as an object with a field `a` and value `b.c`, or as a block statement taking the field `c` of the record `a:b`. Removing this ambiguity completely would require making significant changes to how record IDs are joined (changing the `:` to something else) or requiring that either blocks or objects always be enclosed by parentheses. Both of these changes are quite drastic for a relatively minor ambiguity.

Reviewer: Is this a minor ambiguity? It seems like you can get completely different results from the same syntax? Or am I understanding wrong?

Author: I called it minor, because I don't think there are a lot of situation in which this ambiguity happens, but you are correct that you can get completely different results for the same syntax.
